In this video we'll see how the debugger,
built it into IntelliJ and PyCharm,
can help us to understand what our code's
doing. We've seen how to run the code by
right-clicking in the editor pane, like
so, and selecting run, but just below that
there's this debug option. Now just
before I click that, I want to talk about
an option that might come up on the
screen like you'll see here for Windows users.
So if you see this dialog and you're on windows,
either now or at some other
point when using your IDE, then it's very
important that you tick the box to allow
access on private networks, as you can
see checked on the screen.
Make sure that's checked and then click on
allow access. Failing to do that, well,
you'll find that, basically, IntelliJ or
your IDE whatever you're using won't be
able to access the Internet.
Now on a Mac, although I haven't got a
screenshot for this, you may notice
there's a little message that can appear
down the bottom right-hand corner,
suggesting you install a Cython
extension. Now if you're using a
different implementation of Python, other
than what we've suggested you install in
this course, you won't see that, but with
the CPython implementation on a Mac,
you should see a pop up at some point.
But I suggest you ignore it and if you
do that the dialog will disappear after
a short while. Now in this particular
extension on a Mac, it can be really
useful if you've got a large code base but
at the moment, the code in this course
isn't complex enough to benefit from
installing another extension. It's really
just introducing another potential point
of failure, so for that reason I suggest
you ignore it. Alright, so back to the
screen now. I'm going to click on Debug
instead of Run. Now you can see what's
happened there, we've got some text
showing pydev debugger: process 4672  is connecting.
Maybe we'll say
connected instead of connecting.
Now ignore the process ID. That number will
probably be different for you, and in
fact, will be different every time you're
running it. Now notice that we've got a
debug pane at the bottom of the screen,
rather than a run pane, and that will
come up when we're actually using this
debugger. Now the debugger itself has got
two panes. We've got the debugger and the
console, and you can see at the moment,
the console pain is checked and that
just shows the output from your program,
just like it did when we were running
programs previously.
It's basically the same output if you're running it using
the run option, and we'll see the
debugger tab in a moment. But what I'm going
to do now is just enter my details.
Down here I'm going to type in my name and an
age, and you can see the program runs,
just as it did before in the previous
video. But where the debugger gets
interesting, is when we set breakpoints
in our code. A breakpoint tells the
debugger to pause at that point. This
allows us to see what the code's doing
and step through, line by line. The good
news is that setting a breakpoint's easy.
All you need to do is just click in
the left margin on the line you want to
set the breakpoint at. So I'm going to
set one over here on line 11, clicking in
the margin there, and you can see when I
did that, the line's highlighted and we've
got now a red dot in the left margin. To
clear a breakpoint, click it again,
and you can toggler breakpoints on and off
throughout your code.
I'm gonna set that one back on line 11. Now that I've done that, I want to use the debug option again.
The code will stop when it
reaches that breakpoint. Now to get there,
because we were executing the code at
the moment above that,
we're executing the code at the moment on line 1, so
we need to enter some information until
the code gets to that point. So I'm going to type in Tim and 30.
You can see what happened when I pressed 30 there. The program's now got up to line 11,
and it's waiting there for us to do
something. Now in the debugger tab of the
debug pane, you can see the value of our
two variables there, on the right hand side.
Now the debugger tab normally opens
automatically, as you saw that it did
here in my case, but you can switch
between the debugger and the console
tabs by clicking them. So I'll come over here and click on console, and there's the output.
I'll go back to debugger for now. So
looking at the left hand pane in the
debugger tab, it can look a tad confusing.
The good news is we can ignore all of
that at the moment. Just make sure that
you've got the top option blocks
selected, and you can see at the top
that it is selected for me.
Now to the right of the console tab, note that we've
got a mini toolbar with a few buttons.
The first one, the three horizontal bars
that represent lines of code, shows the
current line that will be executed. Now
where that is useful is in larger programs,
or programs using several files. We've
only got a few lines of code but we can
demonstrate what it does. If I can do
that by going back up to line 1,
say to there. If our current execution line
was off the screen, say, this button is a
quick way to get back to it, so I wanna
come down here and click on that button.
You can see the cursor  went down to
line 11, not particularly useful as a
small file, but very much useful if
you've got larger files or multiple
files that you're working on. Now we're
going to talk about the last button next,
this one over here. It's the last one
that's available anyway. You can see that
it looks a little bit like a calculator,
and it lets you evaluate expressions.
Now our code is about to execute line 11 and
hasn't executed it yet. I'm just going to
move that code down so you can see a bit
more of it, and then I'm going to click on
that little button,
Evaluate expressions. I'm going to move
this over to the right so we can still see the code and see this at the same time.
And under expression I'm going to
type
age less than 18. I come down here, click
on evaluate, and when I do that note that
we've got result equals, any left and
right clear braces, bool being the type,
and then the value, in this case, false. So
looking at our code, we can see now that,
given that age less than 18 is false,
that line 12 won't be executed.
That's because the expression on line 11 is going to
evaluate to false. I suggest you do this,
when using the debugger, as a
learning tool. Don't just click the next
button and watch the code executing. Take
the time to read the code and work out
what it's going to do. When you think
you've worked it out, then you can step
through the code to see if you're right.
A great way to learning, really solidify
the information you're learning in this
course. Now if you just mindlessly click
the button to run the next line, which
I'll talk about shortly,
you won't really learn very much. You'll
learn how to mindlessly click a button,
but we're learning to become programmers
here, not mindless button clickers.
Alright, so moving forward, we know that line 12
won't be executed. Next comes line 13,
though that's going to test the
condition; age is equal to the value of 900.
Now we really don't need the
expression evaluated to work that one out,
because we can clearly see age in
the debugger variables pane there,
at the bottom of the screen, showing the
value of 30. But we're seeing how to use it
so I'm going to enter the expression
anyway; age equals equals 900.
Note also, if I type a variable now that doesn't
exist, we'll actually get an error.
So it's a good way to confirm that what
your typing is valid, so age is equal to
equal, is equal to 900. I was typing 1800
instead of  900. Same do there, I can
click on evaluate, and you can see the result
down the bottom, again, is showing false.
Just to confirm that, I could change this,
result is equal to 30, evaluate.
You can see the value there is true. So I can see
how this is a very useful tool. Well I'll
set that back to 900. Click on evaluate,
we get false again. Basically, that's
telling us also that the code on line 14
won't be executed either.
Alright, so there's no other conditions in our short
little program to check, and none of the
ones we've checked were true. So the only
thing left now is the else block,
so that's what's ultimately going to be
executed on line 16. So let's see
if we're right. I'm gonna, firstly,  close
the Evaluate pop up.
Let's have a look at some of
these other buttons here, to the right of
this little button here that we've already talked about, the Show Execution Point.
The two buttons we're going to
look at at the moment, are this one here,
which is a step over and step into. We
not really going to look at this other
one, step into my code, at this point.
Specifically, it's these first two which
appear to do the same thing, and we'll
actually look at step into when
we actually start writing our own functions.
For now though, I'm going to come over here
and click on step over, noting that we've
got a shortcut key we could use instead
of clicking, if we prefer. So I'm going to
click that once. Notice when I do that,
the code on screen has jumped to line 13.
So line 12 didn't get executed, as we expected,
and we're at the elif statement on line 13. I'm going to click the button again
and see what happens with this
expression, and you can see also we were
right again. In this case, line 14
wasn't executed. Instead we've skipped
straight down to the else code on line
16. Basically, we knew that both of those
expressions evaluated to false, and
we've got confirmation of that by
clicking on the step over button. Now we
can also confirm that nothing's been
output, by clicking over here to the
console tab so I'll do that now.
And notice we've got the two bits of
information that I typed in but we've
got no other output at this time. But if
I click on step over one more time now,
you can see that caused line 16 to
execute. We've got the message 'You're old
enough to vote' printed it in the
console. Clicking it one more time
will execute the last line and then end the
program. You can see that's what's happened.
We've got the message 'put an X
in the box' and the program terminates.
Alright, so that's the debugger. Now we're
going to be using the debugger a lot in
the early sections. I don't recommend
using one for real debugging unless
you're totally stuck, but they're a great
way to watch your code executing while
you're learning about it. Experiment with
setting breakpoints and stepping through
your code to get used to using the debugger. Now before I finish, there's another
button I want to show you. It's very
useful if you do get stuck, if you step
too far, for example, or end up
debugging the Python libraries.
So I'm going to run the program in the debugger one more time.
So notice the Red Square over to the left hand side of the screen, down the bottom.
That's used to stop execution,
allowing you to start again if you
get caught or get into a mess. You might
get some errors when you stop the program,
but I'm going to click on that
now. Now I've only got a note there
saying the process finished with exit
code minus one, but if you do get some
errors when you stop the program, that's
fine. Ignore any errors in that scenario.
That's completely okay when you're
terminating the program, as we've done there,
while stopping it. So with that said, I'm going to finish now, and in the next video
what we're going to do is start taking a look at more on if, elif and else.
See you in the next video.